---
layout: post
title: "Elysia's Archival Essay"
author: "Elysia Yu"
category: ["South Asia", "Singapore", "Hong Kong"]
tag: "preview"
---

### 1\. Introduction

Itinerant theatre played a predominant part in theatrical development in the late nineteenth century.[^1] Availing of the developing transport network and less restricted access to markets in different parts of the world, theatre troupes became more avid for showcasing their work to the globe.[^2] Aside from British and American troupes, Australian theatre troupe companies had also jumped on the bandwagon.[^3] Among numerous ports of call being visited, neighbouring colonized cities in Southeast Asia were frequented by the theatrical troupes from Australia.[^4] Though sharing the similarity of being controlled by the British empire, Australia and her colonized neighbours maintained completely different relations with their colonizer, which in turn casted profound impact on their cultural development.[^5] While much literature has discussed the dynamics between British itinerant theatres and their audience in the faraway lands like Southeast Asia, the history of touring theatres from Australia were comparatively underexplored.[^6] In light of this, this article aims to investigate the touring practices of Australian itinerant theatres in Southeast Asia in the nineteenth century by looking into the theatrical companies founded by Mr Harry Stanley, a renowned theatre manager at that time. The article argues that though Australian itinerant theatres might initially be commercial in nature, it unconsciously acted as the colonizer's instrument of cultural assimilation. How Australians' outlook on British empire affected the intercolonial cultural exchange will be elaborated towards the end of the article.

### 2\. Australia in the late nineteenth century

Since the late eighteenth century, Australia had been facing a gradual invasion by the British people.[^7] Facing British annexation, the aboriginal people resisted forcefully.[^8] The battles ended with significant drop in the aboriginal population and the British settlers became the majority who had overarching control over the land.[^9] Other than political grip, policies were also adopted to achieve cultural assimilation.[^10] Maintaining a sense of Britishness was a major cultural aim as aboriginal cultures were viewed as inferior.[^11] For instance, imperialist plays from British playwrights were one of the popular genres which were put up at theatres in Australia in the nineteenth century.[^12]

Economically speaking, Australia had been developing rapidly over the course of the nineteenth century with the advancement in maritime transport networks.[^13] Nonetheless, the prosperity was not underpinned by timely development in basic infrastructures.[^14] The inner workings of the country were far from pleasant.[^15] For example, huge disparity among the well-off and the poor in Melbourne was depicted in the famous novel *The Mystery of the Hansom Cab* by Australian writer *David Hume*.[^16] Yet, these themes were rarely exhibited in theatrical productions in the late nineteenth century. In contrast, plays tended to be showing utopian prospect with only incidental references to the local interests.[^17]

### 3\. Mr Harry Stanley's theatre companies

Originating in London, Mr. Harry Stanley only moved to Australia in the mid-nineteenth century after serving the British navy in the Crimean War.[^18] Failing in the work of digging, Stanley joined a theatrical troupe and became a performer.[^19] After reaping success in several performances, he then founded his own theatrical company and started to tour around Victoria.[^20] Aside from the Stanley Opera Company, he also established the Stanley's Opera Bouffe and Pantomime Company as well as the Juvenile Operatic Troupe for young performers.[^21] He later extended the tour to cities and ports outside Australia, which led to the companies' ascending popularity in Southeast Asia.  

### 4\. Features of Mr. Stanley's theatrical companies

#### 4.1 Route selection

As exorbitant costs would be incurred by touring, careful selection of travelling routes would be crucial.[^22] The theatre companies usually moved along the colonial trade routes and frequented ports like Bombay, Shanghai and Hong Kong.[^23] The theatre companies had also visited Asian countries like Japan, Singapore, Burma and Siam.[^24] Like other itinerant theatres, the theatrical companies followed the steamships for commercial trade to embark on their touring journey around the globe.[^25] The abundance of European diaspora in these places signified ample demand for entertainment like theatrical performances, which might secure profits in the long run.[^26] Apart from the European population, the local merchants who maintained amicable relationships with the Europeans or Britons might also be target audiences due to their accepting attitude towards foreign cultures, especially those correlated with their colonizer.

#### 4.2 Audience

The theatrical companies usually attracted huge audiences and had the venues filled up with people who longed to see performances by the famed troupes.[^27] While European diaspora might be among the audience to reminisce their home countries' entertainment tradition, the plays also entranced the local audience. For instance, the theatre companies were positively received by the Parsees in Bombay and the troupes even got to perform before the Nizam of Hyderabad.[^28] Theatrical performances by the Australian troupes had become one of the most sought-after entertainment for the local upper-class. Nevertheless, rather than branding themselves as a high-end product, the theatre companies attempted to accommodate audiences from various classes. From an article dated 24^th^ October 1890 in Shanghai, the theatre companies pared down the fare to a considerable extent to boost attendance.[^29]

#### 4.3 Management personnel

The theatre companies were mainly managed by Mr. Harry Stanley. Acting as both manager and actor of his theatre companies like other theatrical troupes at the time, Stanley had become an esteemed figure both locally and externally.[^47] For instance, he was warmly welcomed by Hyderabad noble Salar Jung and received a medal by the Burmese king.[^48] The fact that his obituary was published in a Singaporean newspaper in 1896 indicated his eminence in the territory.[^49]

#### 4.4 Performers

With around fifty actors performing, the companies primarily sourced performers from Australia.[^30] The performers comprised juvenile actors as well as other matured actors. Instead of having the same batch of actors performing throughout the whole tour, Mr. Harry Stanley would make regular travels back to Australia to search for fresh bloods to keep audience intrigued.[^31] Aside from Australian actors, the theatre companies also collaborated with local amateur actors.[^32] The inclusion of young Singaporean actors and Bombay amateur actors exemplified the theatre's attempt to impress local audience.[^33]

#### 4.5 Repertoire & Ways of Performance

The repertoire of the theatre companies chiefly included plays by English playwright W.S. Gilbert and composer Arthur Sullivan.[^34] Most of the plays performed were comic operas with occasional performances of pantomimes and burlesques.[^35] Portraying sailors and soldiers as heroic figures, the plays by Gilbert and Sullivan conveyed an endorsement of chauvinistic and imperialistic beliefs.[^36] *Pirates of Penzance* which was found to be performed in Bombay and Singapore, was a case in point.[^37] In addition, British cultures were also exhibited. For instance, the Scottish folk song 'Auld Lang Syne' were sung by actors at one performance in Bombay on New Year's Eve in 1892, which aligned with the English tradition.[^38]

Apart from performances with overflowing Britishness, the theatre's repertoire also comprised of plays with oriental themes. For example, plays like *The Mikado* and *Naulakha* were performed while the theatre toured in Bombay.[^39] Though these plays were set in the Eastern context, the characters were often depicted as underdeveloped, peculiar and idiotic.[^40] Though awareness of the multi-cultural reality was shown by including characters from diverse cultural backgrounds, these characters were often supernumeraries who played stereotypical roles. For example, while there were British soldiers in one of the scenes of a play performed in 1889 in Bombay, dacoits who were also at the scene were described to be Bengalis.[^41] Also, racially insensitive acts were also performed when introducing Asian elements to their performances, which could be illustrated by one musical performance involving pidgin English songs by a Chinese character in Singapore in 1891.[^42]

### 5\. Roles of Australian itinerant theatre

#### 5.1 Providing entertainment for European diaspora

Like British itinerant theatres, Australian itinerant theatres provided theatrical entertainment for European diaspora.[^43] Instead of performing Shakespearean classics, the theatre companies led by Mr. Harry Stanley selected plays which were more up-to-date with the socio-political circumstances that British diaspora were facing.[^50] Towards the end of nineteenth century, Victorian Britain was veiled by a sense of anxieties over the economic downturn and threats to their imperial rule.[^51] Extravagant performances served as an escape from the unease in late nineteenth century.[^52] Including tunes like 'Rule Britannia' in their performances, the theatre soothed British diaspora's settler anxiety with their overt imperialistic leitmotif.[^53]  

#### 5.2 Colonizer's instrument of cultural assimilation

Though the theatre was not explicitly patronized by the British government and mainly operated out of economic incentives, the theatre's performances had inevitably influenced local theatrical culture.[^54] The accentuation on Britishness in the performances might also affect Southeast Asian audience's perception of their colonizer. Performances might be more readily accepted by the native audiences due to the inclusion of local participation.

Despite its background as theatre companies coming from a colony, the theatre's embrace towards repertoire celebrating Britishness could be justified with the settler's mindset that might have unconsciously influenced the theatrical productions. Born in Britain, Mr. Harry Stanley might have inevitably projected his sentiments towards his home country to his plays. His background might also impact his perception over his identity and his relationship with Australia, which potentially led to an inclination towards a settler's mindset. This might explain the lack of indigenous culture in the theatre's productions.[^44] Another potential justification would be the Australian settlers' unconscious desire of maintaining their connections with the Western world despite its physical distance.[^45] The fact that Australia was surrounded by various Asian nations and isolated from the rest of the Western world intensified its underlying anxiety over the neighbouring countries whose cultures were greatly different from theirs and amplified her yearn for strengthening imperial rule through cultural assimilation.[^46]

### 6\. Conclusion

From theatrical circuits to repertoire, the Australian itinerant theatres that were examined in this article shared considerable resemblance with the British traditional theatres and exuded great sense of Britishness. Other than providing entertainment for the European diaspora, the performances that were delivered also influenced the local audience in Southeast Asian countries. Although the theatre companies operated out of commercial incentives, the background of the personnel involved might affect the production choices. For instance, Mr. Harry Stanley's perceived self-identity might cast an effect on his choice of repertoire and way of performing. Though identifying the actual driving forces behind the theatre companies' production decisions seems impossible in the present time, future studies may examine further the evolving dynamics of Australian itinerant theatres and the South Asian theatres in the early twentieth century.

<hr>
## Notes
* footnotes
{:footnotes}

[^1]: Christopher Balme, and Nic Leonhardt,  "Introduction: Theatrical Trade Routes," *Journal of Global Theatre History* 1, no. 1 (2016): 1-9,

[^2]: Ibid,

[^3]: Richard Fotheringham, and Angela Turner, ed., *Australian Plays for the Colonial Stage: 1834-1899* (St. Lucia, Qld: University of Queensland Press, 2006),

[^4]: Andrew Hassam, "The wreck of the barque James Service from Calcutta to Melbourne, July 1878: commercial and cultural trade between India and Australia," in *Landscape, Place and Culture: Linkages between Australia and India*, ed. Paul Brown, and Deb Narayan Bandyopadhyay (Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2011), 72-93,

[^5]: Marty Gould, *Nineteenth-century theatre and the imperial encounter* (NYC/Abingdon: Routledge, 2011).

[^6]: Christopher Balme, "Maurice E. Bandmann and the beginnings of a global theatre trade," *Journal of Global Theatre History* 1, no. 1 (2016): 34-45.

[^7]: Penelope Edmonds, and Jane Carey, "Australian settler colonialism over the long nineteenth century," in *The Routledge Handbook of the History of Settler Colonialism*, ed. Cavanagh, Edward, and Lorenzo Veracini, 371-389 (Abingdon/NYC: Routledge, 2016),

[^8]: Ibid,

[^9]: Ibid,

[^10]: Ibid,

[^11]: Ibid,

[^12]: Veronica Kelly, "Melodrama, an Australian pantomime, and the theatrical constructions of colonial history," *Journal of Australian Studies* 17, no. 38 (1993): 51-61, ; Kelly, "Colonial 'Australian' theatre writers: cultural authorship and the case of Marcus Clarke's' 'first' play," *Australian Literary Studies* 18, no. 1 (1997): 31-44,

[^13]: Hassam, ; Christopher Pittard, *Purity and contamination in late Victorian detective fiction* (Farnham, England: Ashgate Publishing, Ltd., 2013),

[^14]: Pittard, .

[^15]: Ibid,

[^16]: Ibid,

[^17]: Kelly, "Melodrama,"  

[^18]: "Biography of Mr Harry Stanley," *The Herald*, 26 September 1885, 3, <https://trove.nla.gov.au/newspaper/>

[^19]: Ibid.

[^20]: Ibid.

[^21]: Ibid.

[^22]: Balme and Leonhardt,

[^23]: Balme, ; "Biography of Mr Harry Stanley," 3.

[^24]: "Biography of Mr Harry Stanley," 3.

[^25]: Fotheringham and Turner,

[^26]: Balme,

[^27]: "Stanley's Opera Company at the City Hall," *Hong Kong Daily Press*, 2 July 1892, 2, <https://mmis.hkpl.gov.hk/old-hk-collection>; "The Stanley Opera Company," *The Times of India*, 16 January 1892, 3, <https://search.proquest.com/hnptimesofindia/?accountid=178553>.

[^28]: "Biography of Mr Harry Stanley," 3.

[^29]: "The Stanley Opera Company: The Mikado," *The North-China Herald and Supreme Court & Consular Gazette*, 24 October 1890, 500, <https://search-proquest-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/hnpchinesecollection/news/fromDatabasesLayer?accountid=14548>.

[^30]: "Return of Mr. Stanley's Opera Company," *The Times of India*, 31 October 1891, 5, <https://search.proquest.com/hnptimesofindia/?accountid=178553>; "The Stanley Opera Company," *The Times of India*, 19 July 1889, 5, <https://search.proquest.com/hnptimesofindia/?accountid=178553>.

[^31]: "Theatricals in Bombay," *The Lorgnette*, 6 April 1889, 3, <https://trove.nla.gov.au/newspaper/>.

[^32]: "The Stanley Opera Company," *Straits Times Weekly Issue*, 28 May 1890, 24, <https://eresources.nlb.gov.sg/newspapers/>; "Mystery of a Hansom Cab," *The Times of India*, 3 May 1889, <https://search.proquest.com/hnptimesofindia/?accountid=178553>.

[^33]: Balme, ; "The Stanley Opera Company," *Straits Times Weekly Issue*, 28 May 1890, 24.

[^34]: "The Stanley Opera Company," *Straits Times Weekly Issue*, 20 March 1888, 1, <https://eresources.nlb.gov.sg/newspapers/>.

[^35]: "Stanley's Opera Bouffe Company," *The Times of India*, 5 May 1888, 4, <https://search.proquest.com/hnptimesofindia/?accountid=178553>.

[^36]: Melvin Eugene Page, and Penny M. Sonnenburg, *Colonialism: an international, social, cultural, and political encyclopedia*, Vol. 1 (Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2003),

[^37]: "The Stanley Opera Company," *Straits Times Weekly Issue*, 20 March 1888, 1.

[^38]: "The Stanley Opera Company," *The Times of India*, 4 January 1892, 3, <https://search.proquest.com/hnptimesofindia/?accountid=178553>.

[^39]: "Return of Mr. Stanley's Opera Company," *The Times of India*, 31 October 1891, 5, <https://search.proquest.com/hnptimesofindia/?accountid=178553>; "Bombay Amusements," *The Times of India*, 8 April 1893, 3, <https://search.proquest.com/hnptimesofindia/?accountid=178553>.

[^40]: Page and Sonnenburg,

[^41]: "The Stanley Company's New Pantomime," *The Times of India* 9 March 1889, 3, <https://search.proquest.com/hnptimesofindia/?accountid=178553>.

[^42]: Untitled, *Straits Times Weekly Issue*, 28 January 1891, 8, <https://eresources.nlb.gov.sg/newspapers/>.

[^43]: Balme and Leonhardt,

[^44]: Ien Ang, *On not speaking Chinese: Living between Asia and the West* (London/NYC: Psychology Press, 2001), ; Patrick Wolfe, "Settler Colonialism and the Elimination of the Native," *Journal of Genocide Research* 8, no. 4 (2006): 387-409,

[^45]: Ang,

[^46]: Ang,

[^47]: BOGUS NEED TO FIND ACTUAL FUCKING CITATION

[^48]: "Biography of Mr Harry Stanley, 3.

[^49]: "The Late Mr. Harry Stanley," *The Singapore Free Press and Mercantile Advertiser (Weekly)*, 16 June 1896, <https://eresources.nlb.gov.sg/newspapers/>.

[^50]: Page and Sonnenburg,

[^51]: Ibid,

[^52]: Ibid,

[^53]: Gould, ; Page and Sonnenburg,

[^54]: Balme and Leonhardt,


<hr>

## Bibliography
<br>
<div class="bibliography" markdown="1">
**Newspapers:**

"Biography of Mr Harry Stanley." *The Herald*, 26 September 1885. <https://trove.nla.gov.au/newspaper/>.

"Bombay Amusements." *The Times of India*, 8 April 1893. <https://search.proquest.com/hnptimesofindia/?accountid=178553>.

"Mystery of a Hansom Cab." *The Times of India*, 3 May 1889. <https://search.proquest.com/hnptimesofindia/?accountid=178553>.

"Return of Mr. Stanley's Opera Company." *The Times of India*, 31 October 1891. <https://search.proquest.com/hnptimesofindia/?accountid=178553>.

"Stanley's Opera Bouffe Company." *The Times of India*, 5 May 1888. <https://search.proquest.com/hnptimesofindia/?accountid=178553>.

"Stanley's Opera Company at the City Hall." *Hong Kong Daily Press*, 2 July 1892. <https://mmis.hkpl.gov.hk/old-hk-collection>.

"The Late Mr. Harry Stanley." *The Singapore Free Press and Mercantile Advertiser (Weekly)*, 16 June 1896. <https://eresources.nlb.gov.sg/newspapers/>.

"The Stanley Company's New Pantomime." *The Times of India* 9 March 1889. <https://search.proquest.com/hnptimesofindia/?accountid=178553>.

"The Stanley Opera Company." *Straits Times Weekly Issue*, 20 March 1888. <https://eresources.nlb.gov.sg/newspapers/>.

"The Stanley Opera Company." *Straits Times Weekly Issue*, 28 May 1890. <https://eresources.nlb.gov.sg/newspapers/>.

"The Stanley Opera Company." *The Times of India*, 19 July 1889. <https://search.proquest.com/hnptimesofindia/?accountid=178553>.

"The Stanley Opera Company." *The Times of India*, 16 January 1892. <https://search.proquest.com/hnptimesofindia/?accountid=178553>.

"The Stanley Opera Company." *The Times of India*, 4 January 1892. <https://search.proquest.com/hnptimesofindia/?accountid=178553>.

"The Stanley Opera Company: The Mikado." *The North-China Herald and Supreme Court & Consular Gazette*, 24 October 1890. <https://search-proquest-com.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/hnpchinesecollection/news/fromDatabasesLayer?accountid=14548>.

"Theatricals in Bombay." *The Lorgnette*, 6 April 1889. <https://trove.nla.gov.au/newspaper/>.

Untitled. *Straits Times Weekly Issue*, 28 January 1891. <https://eresources.nlb.gov.sg/newspapers/>.

**Books and Articles:**

Ang, Ien. *On not speaking Chinese: Living between Asia and the West*. London/NYC: Psychology Press, 2001.

Balme, Christopher, and Nic Leonhardt. "Introduction: Theatrical Trade Routes." *Journal of Global Theatre History* 1, no. 1 (2016): 1-9.

Balme, Christopher. "Maurice E. Bandmann and the beginnings of a global theatre trade." *Journal of Global Theatre History* 1, no. 1 (2016): 34-45.

Edmonds, Penelope, and Jane Carey. "Australian settler colonialism over the long nineteenth century." In *The Routledge Handbook of the History of Settler Colonialism*, edited by Cavanagh, Edward, and Lorenzo Veracini, 371-389. Abingdon/NYC: Routledge, 2016.

Fotheringham, Richard, and Angela Turner, eds. *Australian Plays for the Colonial Stage: 1834-1899*. St. Lucia, Qld: University of Queensland Press, 2006.
Gould, Marty. *Nineteenth-century theatre and the imperial encounter*. NYC/Abingdon: Routledge, 2011.

Hassam, Andrew. "The wreck of the barque James Service from Calcutta to Melbourne, July 1878: commercial and cultural trade between India and Australia." In *Landscape, Place and Culture: Linkages between Australia and India*, edited by Paul Brown, and Deb Narayan Bandyopadhyay, 72-93. Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2011.

Kelly, Veronica. "Melodrama, an Australian pantomime, and the theatrical constructions of colonial history." *Journal of Australian Studies* 17, no. 38 (1993): 51-61.

---------. "Colonial 'Australian' theatre writers: cultural authorship and the case of Marcus Clarke's' 'first' play." *Australian Literary Studies* 18, no. 1 (1997): 31-44.

Page, Melvin Eugene, and Penny M. Sonnenburg. *Colonialism: an international, social, cultural, and political encyclopedia*. Vol. 1. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO, 2003.

Pittard, Christopher. *Purity and contamination in late Victorian detective fiction*. Farnham, England: Ashgate Publishing, Ltd., 2013.

Wolfe, Patrick. "Settler Colonialism and the Elimination of the Native." *Journal of Genocide Research* 8, no. 4 (2006): 387-409.

</div>
